it's the same for every individual same
for every company if you understand this
look at your income expenses and your
savings and then do a stress test so
that you get yourself secure the same
things happen over and over again
through time for basically the same
reasons a lot of these things happen
once in a lifetime you know and if you
don't go back and see how they worked
over time then you're in in trouble so
um there's a pattern I could describe
the pattern
um but there's a pattern that happens
over and over again and we're in a
particular spot in the pattern and then
um to understand it not just because it
happened before but to understand
mechanistically how it happens and then
one has a sense of how to deal with it
so speaking of the mechanisms what's
influencing this more when you started
looking back into history are you
looking for this sort of moment in the
death cycle are you looking for
pandemics a collision of the two
what do you think influences us more
well
um pandemics come along occasionally but
anything that's important let me let me
say the three most important
circumstances that existed before we had
the downturn which was caused by a
pandemic but any downturn would have
produced the same results the three most
important things that are happening in
the world now are
um that we're
at the end late in a long-term debt
cycle in which central banks cannot
control monetary policy the same way
they can't lower interest rates
they have they can't get money to a lot
of people who need the money
um in the traditional way so just like
in 1929 to 1932 there was a debt crisis
that came as a result of an excessive
amount of debt in the boom years and
then when you have that in 1932 we hit
zero interest rates
and when they had when they hit zero
interest rates in 32 like in 2008
Central Bank Prince money
um and buys Financial assets
when you talk about financial assets
this is one thing that even I found
myself a little bit confused by what
what is a financial asset
well mostly bonds okay
Central Bank is allowed to buy bonds and
mostly government bonds so if you were
going to describe what a bond is like
what's the easiest way to think about a
bond
um when someone borrows
for a number of years
um and has to pay back
that makes a promise to deliver currency
that's a bond
and so one man's debts are another man's
assets which we call a bond and that is
a promise to deliver currency
and so what happens in these Cycles
is that normally
uh central banks can stimulate the
economy by lowering interest rates
but when you hit zero interest rates
that doesn't work
so the last time it hits zero interest
rates was 1932
and what they did in 1932 was the same
thing they did in 2008.
and that is that the central banks
prints a lot of money and buys
government bonds
and so we're doing that now and just to
be clear the reason that they're doing
that is so somebody has bought a
Government Bond the government is
basically saying hey you dear person
lend me the money I'm gonna build
something roads whatever but I'm going
to pay you back in a year two years ten
years whatever plus interest I would
assume that makes it worthwhile
um and the reason that the government is
going in and buying those is to get back
liquidity to the people that have loaned
them that money
yes because think of it this way the
central government and also companies
and individuals
don't have the capacity
to create money
so the central government has the right
to determine they can tax people they
can get money from people
and they can spend money on whatever
they want to spend money on
but they don't have the right to print
money and create money and credit like
the Central Bank does central bank is
the Federal Reserve similarly the
Federal Reserve does not have the right
to spend money and determine how it's
spent that's for congress all right so
so before because this can get so
confusing and I'll play the role of the
Layman here and just make sure that we
walk through things so the Federal
Reserve I think most people think is the
Department of the government but they're
not are they a private bank
no they're they're a part of the
government that the government that the
system has put into place so to get the
creation of money out of the political
system okay so it sits sort of outside
of the political sphere of the
government
um it is within Congress but it has a
set of rules like the Supreme Court has
a set of rules that means that the
president can't control it the Congress
can't control it
um that it's operating in a sense a
separate way and so
the important thing to know about this
crisis and that it happened in the 1930s
is that in order to get the checks that
we're needing you know a lot of people a
lot of companies
um need checks
now where will thou those checks come
from so there'll be checks from the
government the type of support we're
going to receive is two types of support
where's this all this money come from
so that the government when they say I'm
going to pay more for unemployment
insurance so I'm going to give you a
loan for a small business or so on they
where they get the money from
well they've either tax it but if they
tax it that's bad
so the government they can borrow it
that's what a deficit is the government
runs a deficit
and then the question is who's going to
borrow it when everybody's financially
strapped and the Federal Reserve says
they have the power to print money and
they will say I will borrow it and I I
will lend you the money
so the Federal Reserve is lending the
money
and it is also lending others the money
all right when when they print money are
they literally sending a Brinks truck
with bags full of cash and distributing
it through local banks
no money is digital okay so they're
literally just making Ledger adjustments
in a digital file somewhere right the
important thing to know is
that all that we think about money is
not limited in any way like there's a
certain amount of money out there it's
all Make-Believe
It's All Digital
so they could change the digits and then
they can create money
now that's an important consideration
because if they can create money so
easily how do we know it's going to be a
value when they're creating a lot of it
that's one of the considerations that
are being faced today but the main thing
to know about this or stepping back for
the big picture
is that every individual
every company and every government
has a certain amount of money that comes
in in the form of income a certain
amount of expenses
that and then a certain amount of
savings so you do individually and every
all your listeners do and it works the
same way for everyone
so that if their income Falls and then
less to be less than their expenditures
they're in trouble unless they have a
good savings and then they go to the
savings so all around the world there
are lots of entities that are in trouble
in that way so the government the two
parts of the government the U.S
government to Parts want to give checks
to people now it's difficult to decide
who gets it who doesn't get it but if
they don't give checks to people or to
companies those will go bankrupt because
they may not have enough savings so you
you saw
um J.Crew went bankrupt just went
bankrupt and you'll see others go
bankrupt because they don't have enough
and so when they go bankrupt and that's
a whole other process so in order to
prevent that they have to give money and
so they print money we call it print
there's not even paper much it's
digitally create money and then that
comes in the form of loans okay so
basically they're digitally creating
money which they're allocating to the
government and then the government is
deciding how to disburse those funds
yeah the Federal Reserve will buy
government bonds so it's a transaction
of buying it and that the and they will
also buy private bonds okay they might
pick a company
um at many companies and they'll say I
will buy your bonds which is the
equivalent I will lend to you
and that's what happens okay and that's
happened through history so what we're
going through
is the same process has happened in the
1930 to 1945 period so as I was saying
there are three important things
that is one
the second is large wealth Gap
third
is that
um we have a rising power in the form of
China
uh emerging to compete or challenge the
United States leadership
so when you have these three things
together
um it's um it's a challenging mix and
it's happened repeatedly less effective
monetary and credit system
makes it they have to print a lot of
money can threaten the value of money
second
uh when you have a large wealth Gap and
you have an economic downturn
people are more inclined to have
conflict
so how that's dealt with we're going to
reconsider
how we're going to that wealth will be
divided and that'll change taxes and
relationships
and then the third is we're no longer in
a world order where the United States is
the only dominant power
these three things existed in the most
important things existed and then we had
the downturn terms in terms of the virus
so you could think of the virus like
being a tsunami that came and if it went
and if we had not no more of it it still
would have left a lot of economic damage
so you in all different ways so the the
economic damage has to be understood and
dealt with yeah so the understood and
dealt with is exactly why I wanted to
talk to you so I think that people that
are familiar with Finance financial
institutions and how the economy works
and all that
um they'll find their way through this
but for the average person who
um doesn't understand a lot of this like
when you look at this historical
perspective I.E find a certain level of
comfort in that because of the notion of
another one of these right so we've seen
this before maybe we haven't In Our
Lifetime but historically
um people have so what can the average
person take away from that they don't
have bonds they don't think like that
they may not even understand what their
401K is or they may not even have a 401k
so how do they navigate this is it just
head down do your best to weather the
storm or is there actually something
that they can learn from the historical
perspective and move on now to make this
easier for them
yeah it's the it's the same for every
individual same for every company same
and you if you understand this then you
understand there well there are three
things
um the first is
look at your income
your expenses
and your savings
and then
do a stress test
so that you get yourself secure
if you were to lose your income
or if the income were to fall Beyond a
certain level and you play that out
maybe that means you go get unemployment
insurance but or whatever
how long can you live
in an acceptable lifestyle
and do you have a savings
that is adequate for that
okay so what you do is you calculate
if I lived in a simpler lifestyle
and I had this amount of earnings
um how many months how many months or
years
Could I Live
acceptably then you look at your what
what do you put the money in
what do you say then
don't you worry though that there's a
level of financial literacy so you're
you're saying the basics right and
there's no question like get your
blocking and tackling right before you
start trying to get fancy but uh Ray I
have legitimately started losing sleep
over like how we help the average person
through this I'm not a guy I don't lose
sleep over much but when I stop and
think about most people I think the stat
is the average American if they're hit
with a surprise 500 Bill they're not
able to make it they are living month to
month you've got 30 plus million people
now
um out of work it's you know it
trying to figure out like definitely
Basics right you've got make sure that
you're spending lesson you make
austerity first cut cut cut get your
expenses down to as low as they can 100
um
what what I'm hoping for is that there's
[Music]
um
I don't know there's something that we
can see in in this kind of transition
where either you've got a new Rising
power and there's opportunity
with that I I'm trying to find that sort
of Ray of Hope for people of what they
can do to be proactive either to
generate more income if they've lost
their income or to be more proactive in
their 401K I think about
personal finance the way I think about
health and right now I worry that people
are Outsourcing everything to somebody
else to the government they're they have
a wait-and-see approach
um and what I'm desperately trying to
figure out for myself is what level of
proactiveness of learning about their
health they can do to try to weather
this storm because short of just saving
um and cutting expenses
and maybe that's it maybe there there
isn't any more that they can do but I
guess that's my direct question is there
something more uh I mean you know the
parts right it's it's income expenses
and savings
okay now you can go get the money maybe
the gun money comes in and you say okay
my unemployment benefits are going to be
this or my this is but
um those are the parts then the issue is
uh how clever are you at uh dealing with
those let me ask it another way then who
who should they be voting for like when
you talk about a beautiful deleveraging
which one you should probably
um Define that so you've you've looked
at this stuff so many times it's really
really quite breathtaking
um that there are ways to do this well
there are ways to do this poorly uh you
know we're in an election year I
consider myself like the most apolitical
human being on the planet but when I
stop and think about okay well if I'm an
average person and let's say that I'm
really doing my best I'm doing the
blocking and tackling I'm saving what I
can save
um I've cut my expenses back I'm I'm
earning you know what I can let's hope
that they either have kept their job or
were able to quickly get another job
um how should they be thinking like what
are what is the right way to go through
this leveraging at a political level
maybe politics is the right word but
like at a higher level
well I I
you know
I don't know what you want it to say I
think that each person
should understand there's a certain
level of basic understanding first take
care of yourself and then you know you
hope that you have uh smart people who I
think will most important thing is that
they're smart in being able to engineer
an economy that will increase the size
of the pie as well as divide the pie
well and then also
um that this is done in a
non-antagonistic way
um smart people working together in a
bipartisan way have the capacity of
managing this wealth so if I was giving
political advice and that's not what I
do but if I was giving political advice
the most important thing I think is
um who can do this who's got the
intelligence to do the engineering plus
to do it um in a manner that we are not
fighting with each other that what
history has shown us is that when things
get difficult
people get stressed and they get they
can get angry and they could all fight
with each other and that produces the
next leg of a terrible economy because
the economy won't work efficiently if
people are fighting with each other the
system doesn't work well
so one would have to say uh you know
who's going to bring the country
together behind sensible I would say
bipartisan programs because if you don't
have that then you have a form of
revolution
and you don't have good management and
that's the greatest risk I would say
politically so looking at the Historical
perspective
um who has done this well and then what
have been mistakes that have led to
literal Revolution
when you say who has done it well what
do you mean
um what countries or what periods of
time has going through this kind of
Crisis been managed well so that we come
out the other side with this little sort
of pain and suffering as possible well
an example of well would be the
differences in
um the way Roosevelt did it
um so again
1929 to 32 interest rates hit zero they
print money we had a large wealth Gap
and then they sat down and they figured
out how do we keep it orderly and how do
we change the circumstances with
um whether it's taxes or how do you
re-organize it so that the system works
well there is a risk also at the same
time because the world is going through
that there's a risk of conflict so in
Germany Hitler came in power in 1933 and
he came in power nineteen 33 because
there was a lot of internal fighting as
to to try to bring produce water because
that everybody the left and the right
you know the Communists and the fascists
and they're all fighting about wealth
because everybody's fighting them about
wealth when you have a downturn and then
they need they they were democracies
four democracies existed then that chose
not to be democracies because they
became so disorderly that they wanted
some strong leader to take charge and
run the country and then of course we
had a bunch of straw those types of
leaders and then they had a war that's
how World War II happened so when you
look at that uh you know that's kind of
the political landscape but back to the
average man in terms of his finances I
would say the important thing is those
three elements to have a plan and maybe
to have a plan with uh both your family
you know um how do you get down
uh when things got tough and and you
know and then you have to look at
um you know what happens in policy well
policy
um is a depends on the person some
people would understand more about
policy than other people if if you know
so it depends
on uh what they should do depends on
what they're able to do well
as we
um sort of step back and start taking a
longer review of this what's the role
that UC education playing in I've sort
of when I grew up it was just assumed I
was going to go to college
um I did go to college and I would have
for a very long time told everybody they
should be going to college now I've sort
of cooled off on that in terms of the
debt that people are getting into I know
you and your wife are working a lot in
the school system there in Connecticut
um how do you how do you think about
that what's the importance of Education
in you know when when
we start thinking about protecting
successive Generations how much of that
comes down to education
uh
education
is is the most important thing um I I
was
um raised with a very modest economic
background my dad was a jazz musician my
mom was a stay-at-home mom
um and but I was lucky to have uh
parents who cared for me and I went to a
public school
and I got a good education and I came
out to a world of equal opportunity
and I believe that those are fundamental
Necessities that
um that you have to know how to have an
education of you know facts like um you
have to know how to read write and
arithmetic but you also
um have to know how to behave well with
others to be a good citizen is operate
in a civil way to be able then to go
into jobs and that those ju that
education
um can be
um anything that works I think the big
thing is you know three big things on on
what I think work should be
um
um make your work and your passion the
same thing and make it economic if if it
works that you love your work you'll
probably be better at your work
um and then you find the
um
so you you want those things and then
the then there's the economics of it and
so it could be anything from learning
um trades
um
um whatever it may be education
certainly does not have to be College
college is uh over emphasized and having
a good productive career when I watch
the these remarkable people who are on
the front lines of dealing with this
virus situation and I look at them the
great some of the greatest people are
the people who have the capabilities of
doing certain things that are not have
nothing to do with going to college and
they're on the front lines and they're
contributing a lot and so we uh so in
education and civility but that means
that there has to be equal opportunity
so yes what my wife and I have done
um is um we're particularly
um
heartbroken or
disenchanted with
um
poverty affecting
children in and high school students
having the Equal Opportunity of
Education
so our particular focus in Connecticut
um we made a
a donation a large donation 100 million
dollar donation to the state of
Connecticut for them to match
um and are working to get those
um students uh through high school and
but it could be trade school
um and into jobs and to be able to be uh
productive so you look at all societies
and these are the things that matter
most the society
um becomes a fairer society when there's
equal opportunity for education
and also it becomes a more productive
Society because the opportunities when
extended throughout the whole population
means that you get more people on the
basis of Merit right now that system is
not operating in a good effective way
for example people in the top 40 percent
of income will spend about five times as
much money on their children's education
than those in the bottom sixty percent
and that's not that's that's neither
Fair nor productive so I think that
these types of questions are going to
have to be examined by policy makers in
a bipartisan way as we go through this
but yes in answer to your question you
know it really starts with good total
education the good raising of children
in terms of their actual formal
education and their informal education
and then going out and having an
environment of equal opportunity what is
up my friend Tom bilyu here and I have a
big question to ask you how would you
rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to ten if your answer
is anything less than a ten I've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right I've just released a class from
Impact Theory university called how to
build Ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until that my friends be
legendary peace out
so one thing that I know you have
leveraged to tremendous effect and this
is the very thing I took from principals
that changed my life is to stress test
your ideas to put them out there to ask
how do I know I'm right so like I said
I've really been losing sleep over how I
can be most helpful in helping people
navigate all of what's happening and and
I have come to a conclusion that could
be pure delusion and I would love to
know what you think it's along the lines
of Education which is why I was asking
about that so my obsession is skill
acquisition I think that so the advice
that I've been giving to people if
you've lost your job or not like we have
spent probably the last 10 years maybe
more in an employee ease Market they've
really had this election they've been
able to put a lot of pressure on
employers and now you're seeing a flip
and you're seeing this is going to be an
employer's Market there's going to be a
lot of people obviously there's north of
30 million now it's going to be a lot of
people looking for work and my thing is
if you want to get your ideal job you
want to make your passion something that
you're able to pursue you've got to be
able to outperform other people and I
would say the same thing to a kid that's
coming up somebody that's about to
graduate whatever like you've got to be
better than the next person you've got
to build a skill set that allows you to
excel
and my thing is like you you are living
proof of one simple thing if you can
outperform people there really is no cap
to how far you can go you put your money
where your mouth is when it comes to an
investment strategy obviously with
Bridgewater
um you guys have just outperformed
people it's really been quite
extraordinary and
yes people need to save yes they need to
focus on where uh you know they're
getting their income from
um they need to practice austerity
measures all of that but ultimately
people can Propel themselves forward if
they're out there learning growing
getting better pushing I would go so far
as to say even being aggressive to try
to continue to move up but it comes down
to recognizing that skills have utility
to actually let you do something that
let you out invest somebody they let you
build a better house or a better bridge
and so what I want to see people do
through this time I just think most
people will be obliterated mentally
they're going to get scared they're
going to panic they're not going to be
able to think clearly and they won't put
themselves on a path to excel so I
wonder what
what am I missing there because I know
that people don't that is not a popular
thing to say right now not something
that I get a lot of negative feedback
from people it's like basically pull
yourself up by your bootstraps so I'd
love to understand like
where are the flaws in that thinking
um where when you talk about the um
they're not being equal opportunity
one what can people do to write that
ship at a personal level I get I get at
the higher up systemic the way that we
address it through policy and things
like that but at a personal level is
there is there something people can do
well I think you're exactly right I
think that uh that uh though is short of
specifics and um you know that
particular action and the question is
um who can help them so yes
um if they're Wiley and hard-working and
clever enough they still need
triangulation and help
to find out where is the training
program what is that skill
they they can't do it alone they have to
do it with the health I um and I would
recommend
you know I did two 30-minute videos one
is principles for success
at 30 minute YouTube video and it's
about an approach to life
that a lot of people something like 14 I
don't know a lot of people have seen
this and I would say
um it's worth your 30 minutes I think in
terms of approach to life and then
there's also if you're interested in the
economy I did a 30-minute video how the
economic Machine Works in 30 minutes and
that had
a lot of views more 14 million I think
and it was liked so
um I can't tell them in this very brief
interview how we're going to exactly who
will get them that training and that
capability but I think you're right
skill
that you love
that sells
is what you need now you go to each
person has their own particular way of
possibly getting that to some case it
might be a start low in an organization
and work your way up to some cases it
may be a government training program to
some K in some cases it may be a
relative or a friend who can get you
going and so on uh as I said one of my
main principles is there's always a path
out there
you just don't happen to see the path
now so you have to find the path
if you find that path and you can't find
it alone the way you find that path is
to speak to other people get many ideas
by other people
and then you know you have to keep
yourself trial and error you got to keep
at it like when you're getting a job or
getting a skill it's a lot of trying and
so that requires certain amount of
discipline and if you have a discipline
problem get help with the discipline
problem have somebody kick you out of
bed or whatever it is
that
um you can get there there is a path you
just don't see the right path at the
moment so many aspects of Life are more
actually the opposite conventions like
Comfort it's comfortable
well look life teaches you over and over
again you want to get stronger okay it's
not comfortable you want okay so
stronger does not go with necessarily
comfortable pain okay pain plus
reflection equals progress pain is a
teacher
you want to eliminate pain from your
life you're going to have a better life
no no no because it's giving you
messages okay so so many different
things are the opposite of what we're
taught and it goes down to even the
education system okay you failed
hey that's the beginning of a discovery
process that's a good thing okay okay
now how do I look at failure and learn
from failure no you're stupid you failed
how do people find out like their nature
and do you think of us all as having a
sort of true nature and then from that
how do people decide on the paths of
accomplishment or savoring and what to
define those for people yeah there's
there's a couple of Concepts in there so
I'll uh and they're related and I'll uh
but I'll post them
um
first of all on the nature it's really a
self-discovery process
discovering what you want
um discovering what you're like like you
were describing your various cases where
you're discovering what you like and
that you go through that Discovery and
and the best way to do that is to want
to do that right it takes an hour and
it's a self-discovery thing
you created it yourself yeah and we've
used others we've used Myers-Briggs team
Dimension workplace inventory and so
other and then we move beyond that the
main thing like is if you want
self-discovery you then you then you'll
find your ways of getting the
self-discovery they'll appear all around
you and yes you have your nature the
thing that Pope don't be you know around
peg in a square hole find your nature
what's going to flourish and make your
you know that's why I said when you were
talking about your development mine too
make your passion and your work the same
thing know what your nature is yes so I
believe in terms of that particular
nature then we get to the particular of
one of the big choices in life is Savor
life
or accomplish
like we have a lot of choices in our
lives and they're almost sort of
mutually exclusive sometimes uh you know
I just I want to go to the ball game and
I want to watch movie and I want to do
that and I just want to sit back and on
a nice day and smell the roses
okay simultaneously
I want to change the world
okay I want to change the world and I've
got this or
um the work-life balance question and
all of those we face those types of
choices right so
um it's really important to go above
oneself and to reflect on that and also
by the way to realize that
um the choices are not
you're approaching the choice wrong
when you
often see it as kind of that trade-off
because
the truth is
you can have a lot more life and you can
have a lot more
if you just know how to get more out of
a minute how much do I get per per
minute or how much do I get per hour do
you have secrets on that because I will
there are a number of them in in here
but and we could talk about them but the
capacity
to rather than we do all have to face
our choices
but to also realize that you can expand
how much life you're going to get out of
life and how at that range if you really
do it well
so
there are those choices which are those
choices and we Face them and then you
have to decide how to do them well give
me a couple
things that I can do to get more out of
a minute
first of all if you do make your passion
and you work the same thing
um then you're it's great right because
your passion uh whatever it might be
you're a painter or you're an
entrepreneur or whatever that is and you
find that more enjoyable than going to a
ball game let's say then that's becomes
a passionate thing that's one thing
second to know how to work with people
who can do things really well to get the
most leverage out of people okay third
how do you get yourself really what are
the right work habits
um you know anyway there's a whole bunch
of those kinds of things where you how
do I just just what you say how do I get
it done without me doing it
who's the best to do it and how do I get
in oh you all of a sudden you open
yourself to up to all different
possibilities of how you can do that
right no time I think Tim Ferriss wrote
what the four-minute
or the four-hour uh work week work week
or something like okay for our work week
okay or okay there are approaches uh all
those ways of being able to do that so I
just gave you uh uh you know a few what
are the elements of struggling well
what does it mean to struggle well and
how do we do it
well
first that that's why that phrase I use
the phrase struggle well or tough love
okay I put those words together because
that
exemplifies the fact that people don't
think they go together
and so if you start to realize
struggling well is what your uh will get
you what you want okay rather than
avoiding struggle
um that's what I'm trying to convey and
so
um if you realize that then you will go
to the struggle
you won't be averse to the struggle and
you will think and then under that in
the book I wrote all these different
ways of what it means to struggle well
okay how you uh have thoughtful
disagreement how you listen to maybe or
you're not good at that or not how you
learn how you navigate all the ways
through that so that you get stronger
because if you don't struggle you won't
get stronger okay so struggling well go
above it you know okay struggling well a
big element is to go above your struggle
just like you did I you look back and
say okay
um am I struggling well rather than be
in it and doing those things so there
are a lot of different ways of how to
struggle well but if you know okay that
struggling is a good thing
okay if you want to be strong it's a
good thing I'll give you another example
I have a a saying
if you worry you don't have to worry
and if you don't worry you have to worry
okay
because what I mean is
um if you're worrying about what can go
wrong your chances are you will create
the protections against that thing going
wrong
and therefore that's good
and if you're not worrying about the
things that are going to go wrong
then now probably the things you never
expect are going to come and hit you
okay and so it sounds counter-intuitive
if you worry don't have to worry don't
worry you better worry but what it means
is that process of okay go to the thing
go to it and enjoy it view these things
as puzzles your personality will change
you'll enjoy it okay because life is a
puzzle it's it's a going through the
jungle okay it's it's like that I'll
I'll tell you a story yeah
so I um I crash
and I figure oh
risk and reward go together
you want to have a great life
okay and you want to be safe at the same
time they sound almost like mutually
exclusive
okay so I so I viewed it as okay I'm
like sitting on one side of a jungle and
that if I can get to the other side of
the Jungle safely I'll have a great life
but uh okay but if I cross the jungle
all sorts of things going to happen now
what am I going to choose am I going to
be on this side of the Jungle and uh
have just an ordinary life
or am I going to have what I think is
the best life possible but oh I can get
bit and all those things and that's just
the nature of life and then I and I said
I have to it's my nature I have to have
the best life I can have so I've got to
go into the jungle now the question is
how do I go into that jungle and be
successful at that and I could tell you
the answer
the answer is first by worrying about
what I don't see that I might be wrong
with and to do it with people who see
the things that I might not see and we
are all doing and as a mission to get
through that jungle well together and
when I went through that jungle and we
do that together the thing I found out
which is so wonderful is I don't want to
leave the jungle I don't want to get to
the other side because I want to be with
those people on that mission and that
whole experiences becomes great so I
found my way to be successful in the
jungle to get to the other side and I
found out what really is a great reward
and that's extraordinary and and I that
resonates with me so hard about really
enjoying the struggle and a that's
what's making you stronger B there's
just something innate certainly with a
certain personality type that that is
what you're going to love is that fight
and reaching your limits and pushing
Beyond them now I'm curious
is there going to be a struggle for you
in the third phase is there a new Jungle
that you're going into so you to quickly
Define that for people you said uh in
Phase One You're dependent on others
you're essentially a child and you're
learning phase two you go to work other
people become dependent on you and then
at the end of phase two you pass it off
to other people you want them to thrive
without you you give them the knowledge
and the wherewithal and then in phase
three you
savior
uh
um you save your life
um what's that going to look like for
you it's the freedom to do whatever you
want to do without obligations it is the
realization that you shouldn't and it's
not good to control anybody it's just
savoring life that you have you can do
anything you want you go from free you
go to Freedom
um if there's a life Arc yes there's a
life Arc and in
um I I put together this book is a 600
page book I also then uh was asked by a
lot of people to make a simpler version
um about principles for success and it's
a little book and it'll be out uh or
putting it out on the newsstands you
actually could be pre-ordered on Amazon
um and in that book I show a life Arc
and I track through what are the various
phases of life and what what is the
happiest phase what is the least happy
phase and how does it work
and I could take you through all that if
you're interested I'm very interested oh
okay well I don't depends how much time
we got but um okay that uh maybe the
slightly nutshell okay the nutshell
version is you start off and it it is
very very
um it's a it's a really enjoyable phase
in life you start to have uh start to
experience responsibilities like junior
year okay do I get into the school I
want to get into or whatever that's
quite common college is great it's
exploratory come out of college there's
the most amount of Freedom you have so
that transition and school come into now
the new phase of life is totally
different than the first phase of life
because what it means is you don't
follow any track all all through there
you are following track in the definite
and the direction of others and now you
could live anywhere you want you can
pick any job you want you can do
anything you want you have total freedom
there's no guide you can do anything you
want you have that freedom and you move
forward with that and then you start to
make decisions and you start to um take
on obligations you might get married you
might have kids you have jobs and you
take on that and the least happy period
in life by surveys of happiness is
um 45 to 55. okay that uh because that
then you have
the work-life balance and the
obligations and too many things to do
and uh and then maybe it's not as
idealist idyllic as you want you know ah
you get into the marriage and whatever
it is and then maybe it's not the
marriage that you expected or the things
that you're having and all of those
things that's a difficult phase of life
that middle part of that phase in life
45 to 55 and so on
um and then people transition it's
interesting and opposite than what I
would have expected that the happiest
phase in life
is between 60 and 80. and and the you
know the funny thing about it which is
really funny
um they ask people
um
um how good do how good do you look
um and they rate it the highest at that
age now that's not true right but what
happens is people at that point feel
more comfortable with themselves in
various ways when you make that
transition you're eliminating all of
those obligations you're eliminating all
of those things you're giving yourself
free I don't have to take care of it I
Savor ah my family's well without me or
whatever as I've got the free time I
could do whatever I want to do that
doesn't mean life isn't exciting I find
life very exciting I'm very vital I like
those types of things but totally free
of choice and you also Savor the life
Arc you know even as people approach
their death they approach the death in a
whole different way than what death
seems to be for people in their early
years right oh you're terrible terrible
thing no it's just part of that
particular process and how do you do
that life Arc and ah the curtain goes
down you know and that is a different
phase in life so um you know my
responsibility now is to pass along what
I'm doing like right I got plenty of
money so I'm not working for money I'm
giving away plenty of money because of
because it helps and whatever and I'm
just passing along I'll have that up by
far and and then I'm going to go quiet
and I'm going and I save her life and
you go I could just I love nature so I
go outside in nature okay that has a big
effect on me I love it so that's what
the third phase of my life looks like
yeah man that the whole notion that
you're living an arc that there are
phases I think is really important and I
I don't think enough people recognize
that your frame of reference will change
as you move from phase to phase and what
was important to you in one phase will
not be important to you in the next and
to because I was thinking as you were
talking I was like I personally don't
believe that you can skip a phase I
don't think that certainly not with my
personality and probably not with yours
it's not like you can skip the the
accomplishment phase and go straight to
the saver phase and I thought about that
you know my wife and I have made enough
money we could buy an island and retire
and and just be done with it and when I
really thought about how that would make
me feel
didn't seem like it would make me feel
the way that I want to feel because I
still want to be in the jungle but as I
hear you describe the savoring it's like
yeah I get how my life could get to a
point where that's what I would crave
yeah you see what I'm hearing you do
well is you're looking down on yourself
again you're describing I'm looking at
how I feel I'm looking at so you're
connecting the the feelings with the
thinking and I so that's that's true and
in terms of no of course there's a
sequence to that life what I did in the
book which would be fun for people to do
is I show all the different markers in
in all the different phases and little
boxes next to them and so what they can
do is they can check where they are they
know exactly where they are and then
also by showing that I'm showing them
what they can expect because if they're
if you're here on that Arc you can
expect these things probably as you're
going check check those are the things
now you can start to imagine where do I
want to be in 10 years and also where
are the people I I love who I care about
or what are their relationships where
will they be where will my children be
in 10 years and what will they go
through or what we're not parents where
will they be in 10 years and how will
that relate to how I want to have my
life go because and it's the same thing
that you'll see the same things happen
over and over again all these lives are
basically kind of the same thing so and
when you put that in perspective and you
step back and you look at it it's really
great the notion of it's another one of
those like the and I say that in a way
designed to remove fear and uncertainty
which is something that paralyzes so
many people and I think one of the
things you've really given certainly me
and anybody who's really deeply come in
contact with your work is that sense of
there is that higher perspective that
shows that you're not the first person
to have a child you're not the first
person to embarrass yourself publicly
you're not the first person to go
through whatever heartbreak or heartache
that you're going through and when you
can contextualize it then you get to to
another thing you've said which of
course
Buddhists have been saying for a long
time this too shall pass like whatever
hardship you're in the middle of or
whatever Joy you're in the middle of
it's it's all part of a cycle and so all
of it will
ease in the end and so yeah and your
preferences will change
realizing how it works
is so great because like the thing you
love at Penn is different than the thing
you love at 20.
or 30
we all can think what is the thing you
love to 20 or 30.
that was fun and then you go to 40. and
you go to 50. and they change and to
realize how they will change
and and you move Beyond
it's it's beautiful and it's helpful
the most important thing I think is to
know your nature
what is your nature what is what what
are your strengths and weaknesses and
your likes and your dislikes and once
you know that then you also think what
are the fits oh I would like that job
and the job could pay me well and then
you figure out okay how do you do it how
do I get to it but there are different
people in different circumstances so I
can't answer them all now yeah
um I agree with you so I want to go back
one thank you for the feedback that I'm
I was being super vague I think that's
really helpful so let's start getting
really specific as much as we can
knowing that people are going to be sort
of at very different places as they're
hearing this but I think this will be
helpful so one the video that you're
talking about and I'll speak for you and
correct me where I go astray but I
watched the video multiple times think
it's really extraordinary and basically
to put it in a really small nutshell
it's basically go out try things fail a
lot learn and keep progressing and that
that's basically if I remember right you
have like this sort of circular ascent
and it's from the failing and the
learning that you ultimately make the
progress but if you put your head down
you don't want to see your mistakes you
don't want to see the flaws in your
thinking you're going to trap yourself
at a plateau and you're never going to
be able to push beyond that so you've
got to seek out disconfirming evidence
you have to seek out where you're weak
and in fact one thing I will I sort of
disagree I get what people mean so when
you say know your nature
I will say by Nature before you get to
that second part let me just
on the thing yes it's the looping and
learning from mistakes
but it it another part of it
is the realization that you don't have
to make your decisions in your own head
okay now when you start to realize that
you know what you're good at and what
you're bad at that a power comes to you
when you start to know uh okay who's the
best person to give me the advice or
who's the best person to lead me through
this or when you start to know that you
can go beyond what you think and your
opinionatedness so that you can
triangulate I call it triangulate with
others so that you find three people who
are really
capable of giving you good advice who
will argue with each other and argue
with you so you can see all sides of it
and you work yourself through so it's
not just your eyes looking for the path
but it's other people's eyes looking
with the path with you knowing that
you're going to have uh successes and
failures but that power of that
collective learning and triangulate well
with humbleness is a great power as you
go through that cycle I love that so
I'll push that a step further and I will
say this so I'm going to be super blunt
to anybody watching right now and Ray if
you think that I'm wrong I trust that
you will jump in no one is coming to
save anybody and that's the hard truth
and if I look at history and even if I
listen which I've listened to literally
every word that you've said on the
subject publicly anyway that this is
just gonna suck like there is going to
be a level of brutality that most of us
have not experienced in our lives
companies are going to go under people
are going to lose their jobs they're
going to be people that are going to
struggle to find their next meal and
what what I want people to understand is
just like you just said you can
triangulate you can get people to help
you think through but I want them to
understand that they can do that in a
book at a library they can do that
online if they still have access to the
internet which as of right now even just
going to the library you can get access
to being online you changed my life
before you and I ever met I read your
book I had never I didn't even know who
you were at that point and somebody just
said hey you've got to read this book
it's got really powerful ideas on trust
and creating these hard principles out
of all your mistakes I read it
immediately recognize that this aligned
with what I call the physics of Being
Human it was so in line with removing my
blind spots getting people acknowledging
that other people are better than me at
certain things and so while I take a
little bit of an exception because I
think that you can't say what you're
good and bad at until you've been at
this for a long time you've been trying
you've been pushing you're learning
you're failing because by Nature I'm
lazy I I am not very bright I think
there are people that can process raw
data far faster than I can
but I'm willing to admit when I'm wrong
I'm willing to admit that I don't know
I'm willing to admit when I make a
mistake and because of that because I go
in that cycle that you talk about making
a mistake looking nakedly at it not
pretending I didn't screw up asking
people to point out my flaws and then
going and now I'm gonna have to do what
is called deliberate practice to get
better at that thing and I don't just
ask and I don't think people can afford
right now to just say oh what do I want
to do work for a lot of people this is
going to be Maslow's hierarchy of needs
you need safety you need security you
need food shelter and I think it's going
to come to that and so recognizing there
are people out there right now that know
more than you you are going to make a
mistake but those mistakes are huge
learning opportunities you have to admit
that you made one
you have to seek people that can help
you remove those blind spots and then
you have to put in the work to get
better
does any of that sound crazy no doubt
that's totally totally right
and then um it comes from
once you have a fear
that you might be wrong
but you have still the audaciousness and
courage to go forward
you're a lot smarter
than the person who thinks they know
there's a there's a quote that's
Jefferson said
he who knows he knows not is closer to
the truth than he whose mind is filled
with falsehoods and and so when you know
that and with and then with your
character and your determination you go
forward the smartest people I know
are the most humble
it what the more you learn the more you
realize oh I'm eager to take in so
that's right
um but back on your audience
I I think your audience ranges from um
you know there's a wide range that you
have in your audience
and I would say that there are many
people in your audience
who can plan
for a simple lifestyle that can be
wonderful sometimes we acquire these
needs that aren't at anywhere near as
big as as we make them out to be
and you know
um do you have a bed to sleep in do you
have food to eat do you have basic
health care
okay if you start to think okay what are
my needs that I really need and I'm okay
and how can I make Provisions for those
needs
then once you've got that in your mind
you're you're free okay you you can go
beyond that that you may say listen oh I
can do that for a year or two years or a
month or whatever but you I think we
visualize too much the things that we're
used to one of the good things about
this exercise is that you can bring it
brings you back to basics you can be
brought to Basics and like I'm saying if
you have a bed to sleep in and you've
got food
and so on and you have those Basics and
and good relationships with people who
care about you and basic health care
so if you budget for that and you figure
how do you have it maybe it isn't in the
luxurious place you're in maybe it's in
the country and so on once you visualize
that and you get that down in your head
and you say oh I can get that
then your stress will disappear because
you as you visualize that in many ways
that's a happy life it doesn't take a
lot to there's stimulation there's
nature there's relationships these
fundamental
wonderful things the most important
things can be obtained and so for many
of you I think if you look at that and
you budget for that I'm seeing a number
of people
um who are
um going broke
uh and and I've watched this over many
years
and really it's just the adjustment
process when that once they get to that
point where ah you know they have they
get settled
they're fine
it's the ambiguity it's the worry it's
the stress so if you do that from the
beginning and you have that that played
out in your head then you know
everything from there you can play with
and it's your it's uh icing on the cake
so I want to emphasize you can budget
for that you can look at that find that
scenario
find what that looks like so that you
know you've got it down then you know
you're safe once you've got safe
everything beyond that is luxury I
forget who the Greek philosopher was
maybe you remember that used to go and
he would sleep on the street like once a
month or something like that in shabby
clothing because he wanted to remind
himself oh this is what I'm afraid of
and this thing isn't that bad I mean I
always found that interesting I take a
slightly different approach I think that
is really powerful and I think that's an
important anchor for people so my wife
and I always say to each other because
look we have been dirt poor
um and we have now been very wealthy and
All Along The Journey we've always said
to each other look man if I have you
like everything else I'm good so
literally there are only two things I'm
legitimately afraid of there are things
I don't want but there are two things I
am legitimately afraid of brain damage
because then I cannot build my way back
I can't have the level of fulfillment
joy that I want and losing my wife
because a life shared to me is like the
the highest importance now having said
that I'm going to set all that aside and
I I hope people heard you and I hope
that they take it to heart to paint a
lifestyle that they can love and it's
beautiful but it's simple
um and you know they don't have all this
overhead hanging over them but I know
thyself as you were saying know what
you're good at what you're not I've
always told people if you want a calm
peaceful life I'm not your guy there
there is somebody else for you to go
listen to
um and follow that Journey if if you
want to be aggressive and you want to
build something that matters to you I
don't need it to be big I don't need it
to be a business whatever I just people
that want to express themselves that
want to get great they want to become
extraordinary at something that's what
I'm far more interested in and so the
way that I look at it is right now it's
a time where economically the chessboard
has has been flipped over but in in that
moment there's going to be opportunity
created
and for people that and this my central
thesis is what I said earlier Panic is
the problem
people cannot allow themselves to panic
which is why I like what you're saying
don't don't worry if you're if you lose
everything right as long as you have the
things that really matter to you and I
think that's important so people don't
panic so they can be clear-headed so
they can figure out where the
opportunities are and then they get the
skill set that they need to capitalize
on that opportunity which for me is like
when I and that's why I keep saying I'm
losing sleep over like how do we get
information out so that I've worked in
the inner cities a lot and to get the
information to somebody out there that
they can triangulate right that that's
not a rich upper class exercise that's a
the information is out there it's been
put in books on a website in a podcast
like the the number of the world's
greatest thinkers right now that you
could be taking this information from
but you have to be willing to test it
you have to be willing to incorporate it
and actually act on it and do something
so I'm not clear what's your question
about that not so much a question is I
I'm I'm presenting what I think are
ideas that I want people to run with
partly I'm hoping if there is a flaw in
my thinking I want you to point it out
so going back to the need for a
specificity so um we're talking about
there isn't equal opportunity because
there's not equal access to education
which I will take as the core of your
thesis for generationally moving forward
in a useful way true
it's it's a core piece yeah okay so what
I'm saying is I really hope that that
gets addressed and I will certainly do
whatever I can you're obviously uh doing
a massive amount there but I also want
people to not wait for someone to make
that change I want them to realize right
now today they can go and learn
something they can educate themselves
you said that it's not about college
it's about getting a skill that lets you
live a fulfilling fulfilling meaningful
life
um with a meaningful career and so I
want to see people take action but if
there is a flaw in that thinking I want
to know no no
um I don't of course I think it's
totally right I think uh them the issue
is going to the next step for the
particulars of actually
um helping somebody and um and there's a
combination of not only what they can do
themselves uh but finding others who
will help to take them by the hand and
help to provide that guidance uh to be
able to do that all right so finding a
job let's say you know you think okay
how do you find a job so it you have to
be specific uh so what we could say
great find a skill okay great but
literally how do you go about finding
that skill let's talk about so so one
thing you've talked about from an
investing standpoint is when this begins
to happen and monetary policy begins to
break down uh won't spend a lot of time
describing a fiat currency but
essentially money that isn't Associated
to anything like gold so you've broken
that so you said it gets reassociated
because gold has intrinsic value or
rocks because it's used to build things
so what is
looking at the Historical perspective
what are things that are safe bets in
terms of this job is going to be here in
five years that this is a good place to
begin building that skill set
you're talking about the skill set not
the investment I guess yeah skill set I
think that that's maybe more useful for
people if they've just lost their job
and you know they're sort of just trying
to make ends meet at this point
well in terms of
um
I I think in terms of any environment
the lessons that we get over and over
again is that you can't be sure what the
next environment and twists and turns
are what you don't know is greater than
anything you do know
so if if you were in the airline
business or you were in the hospitality
business
um and that was wonderful and you liked
it and everything else all of a sudden
that changed in important ways so the
important thing it more or the more
General abilities in terms of investing
what that means is you need to know how
to diversify well
that's the most important thing in terms
of any aspect in life to know how to
deal with what you don't know is more
important than anything you know because
the world is so much more surprising
than you can really be sure of so in a
general sense for skills I mean I think
uh and skills are part of you what what
are your environment you know find out
those things that um are that are
self-sufficient and maintain uh
flexibility
you have to know how to maintain
flexibility and change well if your
career is in one area
um you have to know how this you have to
develop the skill for changing a career
and that all comes down to knowing how
to find the path to know how to
triangulate well with others I want to
talk about so you've done such an
extraordinary job Ray I I truly stand in
awe of being able to go and learn a new
area a new
um
element of the world when you announced
that you were going to be taking this
historical View and that you were going
to go backwards I mean something like a
thousand years or however far you went
back
um how do you begin that research
process so for somebody that's like I
want to invest my time wisely what is
sort of a high level way that you
approach learning in general
well for for me
um it's a lot
um the alignment of the three things
that I said before what is my passion
um then you know knowing my nature what
is my passion
um and can I align my work to my passion
and then uh does it pay adequately for
me to take care of my needs
and for me
um I'm I do that because it's my passion
um you know and so when you find your
passion
that's aligned with
your work
if you can do that but how do you go
about learning something new so when you
started researching the historical
context of what we're going through now
is it picking up books is it um well for
me you see I have been my nature is I'm
extremely curious
okay and I love my game
my game is to learn about the world
interact with the world and Bet On It
and I'm very curious
so it so it might be whatever your game
is like you've got a game
okay that's why we're you're
interviewing me because that's your
passion that's your game and if you can
line those three things up but and you
know your nature because they're if you
know your nature you can find your role
you want to find the right role for you
right it's not just go get a job and you
know it might say I would like to be
um an architect well I mean you have to
know your nature
and then you can find your role and so
I'm I'm hesitant to say that what is
true for me is true for somebody else so
when you ask me what you know like okay
those are my big things uh meaningful
work and meaningful relationships like
relationships matter a huge amount to me
so if I can have a work that feeds my
curiosity
that I'm passionate about and that uh
pays me adequately
and you know and I do that uh with great
people
those are the things that feed me
and so you have to know those things
that feed you like I like the big
picture somebody might like uh details
you know I I you know you have to pick
those things that are for your nature
and and align those things I'm talking
about and how did you specifically go
about starting this big research project
did it start with a book did it start
with reaching out to historians
no no it's I mean in a sense the journey
started out when I was 12 years old and
I carried and I
um and and then I I took my caddying
money and I had newspaper out and I did
a number of things like that I took my
odds and ends and I uh put it in the
stock market
and you know and um and then I and and I
got hooked on the game
do you have anything about that nature
of questions in that process like that
so I think it was Tony Robbins that said
if you ask a better question then you're
gonna get a better answer and basically
questions are going to control the
outcome do you focus on what question
you're asking and trying to answer or is
this something completely different than
that questions questions that's right
it's the hunger to know you'll you'll
notice it different in people
there will be people who wow you listen
good question good question good
question
then there will be people who can't ask
questions that they're just telling you
what they think
they
almost you think they're acting smart
they think they're acting smart and
they're the stupid ones
the Smart Ones are old question now how
do I I have to find the answer to the
question next question because the
questions and the power and the pull
to answer those questions and so on is
the thing that drags you forward and
it's excitement do you have a pull
okay what's your pull
you know so
um yeah it's all in questions I think
it's all in a journey life isn't a
journey an adventure that's why I'm
trying to say in principles and uh for
success or you can get by the way
principles
um of any of these principles are also
principles in action is an app that's
available on the I store eyesore and
it's free
and it has all of these things in it but
it and so I don't I you know because
we'll we'll separate
um I think people might like that but
you not have to know your pull and then
along the way you're going to have your
adventure and you're going to learn and
then you go through your phases of life
and each phase is different like you
talked about your face you're in the
middle of your phase in life you talked
about your wife and your relationship
with her okay that is a phase of life
and when you go and by putting it in
perspective it's helpful
um in the back of that book uh
principles for Success there's a life
Arc chart
and if you know where you are on that
life Arc
and you know what the next 10 years is
typically like and you know what you the
people you care about are on their life
arcs you can almost know what's coming
at you and then you could start to think
about it so it's at that level of
knowing yourself and knowing how these
things happen over and over again that
you can achieve your path don't be
surprised most life is this is the same
things that happen over and over again
you're born you probably have parents to
take take care of you maybe you have one
maybe you have two but somebody does
they teach you you have your first phase
of your life where you're dependent on
them and you're learning then you come
out to your second phase of your life
and then you're working and others are
dependent on you and then you have that
so these things happen over and over
again and and you just have to know that
path and know how to approach it
so
really fast before I let you go
you're working on a new book The New
World Order which I find very
fascinating and you've been publishing
some of the chapters on LinkedIn
um what do you think the odds are just
to really go back to the finance side of
this what do you think the odds are that
America Remains The Reserve Bank and the
reserve currency
um and if it's not us who do you think
it will be
uh well all currencies eventually die
and all Empires
eventually diminishing their other
Empires and the question is essentially
the pace of what how that happens
I think that um but for most of your
listeners it's most likely going to
happen in a way that's tolerable if you
can manage it well think about the
decline of the British Empire and you
see if people are living in London and
so on it's not that the world blows up
it's that they have to re-adapt and they
know how to re-adapt and so I think that
um we're going to come through more
difficult times I think the next three
to five years will be difficult times in
ways that haven't existed in their
lifetime but has existed in other
periods of time like the 1930 to 45
period
so to be able to adapt well
to invent yourself again to adapt and to
navigate that maybe with a perspective
of knowing what those other times were
like is the best thing to do so the
reason I'm doing that series on LinkedIn
is to help people understand
what those times are like and then help
them prepared the reason I wrote the
book principles is so that it's it's a
particular approach because the same
things happen over and over again for
basically the same reasons and once you
get that and you have the
self-discipline to know how to play the
game well then you'll be fine
so
um one where can people connect with you
right now and then I have one last
question that I want to ask
well I'm um as I say I'm on social media
and um we um and I'll interact with
people on social media on the standards
you know LinkedIn Twitter face uh
Facebook and Instagram by and large
um but the more the most uh valuable
stuff is if you go to uh principles.com
you can get the whole pile or or I would
say that um some of those places you
know so as this next three to five year
um part of the cycle hits us what is one
thing that people can do
um that you know from the historical
perspective will most insulate them from
the the probably emotional
um and maybe Financial damage whatever
you think is more important
well the the uh the things that I
thought about some of the things I
mentioned earlier the plan for uh the
worst case scenario and make it terrific
is one of the things
um the understanding how to triangulate
well to deal with whatever problems that
you're going to face and how to work
that through to find the PATH and find
your nature but also uh one thing that's
helped me a lot is meditation that uh
um meditation gives you a calmness an
equanimity
so that you can almost look at your
circumstances and you can navigate it
with a Clarity of thought without all of
that stress it's healthy because it
reduces stress and it also makes you
smarter to make the decisions well so I
would say that that would also be
something that I would recommend because
if if you have the Equanimity that
centeredness that comes centeredness and
you have your plan and you triangulate
well with others so that you can get all
the best advice and don't have to
approach it in your own head
you know you're a long way there in your
mind that we think what do you want and
the reality is when you look at the
neuroscience and psychology that there
are different parts of your brain that
want different things
and so in the simplest sense there is
the logical part of the brain that
you're conscious of it's called the
conscious and you think you're being
logical and you want to make those
decisions
and then there's the subliminal below
the limbic system part of the brain
which is the emotional and it's not as
conscious to you but it has more of an
influence on you than really The Logical
one and so they're not aligned and so
when you're experiencing that pain or
let's say the ego right there were two
main things you got an ego barrier and a
blind spot barrier if you can get past
your ego barrier and you get past your
blind spot barrier you can accomplish
anything because you also know that you
don't have to do everything to you don't
have to figure it out yourself you can
take in from other people the different
ways to approach things in the best
possible way and so the realization that
we all are really struggling with
ourselves and to think which are which
is in control meditation helps to deal
with the alignment of those two things
because both are valuable in other words
intuition imagination the things we
really love come from our subliminal
uses right our needs whatever they may
be they come from here that's subliminal
they may be valuable they may be scared
damaging you don't know the difference
and so when they come up and you're
looking at those with your logical mind
and you can align those things you're
probably in good shape if you can do
that that alignment between the
subliminal and the logical and you can
do that with other people so that you
can triangulate with other people and
say does that make sense and get
alignment that alignment is the path to
the Future because you only have to know
what the best things to do are you don't
have to have them all come up from your
head and for God's sakes don't be overly
opinionated because just because you
have that opinion it doesn't mean it's
true so that's where the two U's and the
alignment really is so important I want
to talk about the process of getting
those two things aligned tying this into
meditation so in my own experience
meditation is a a Stillness it's a quiet
from the chatter of the mind and more
maybe profoundly than that I can feel my
brain shifts into a different gear so
maybe it's less linear thinking it's
more lateral I'm making connections that
I might not otherwise make so is it in
in that still in that quiet where you're
able to look at your what's bubbling up
from beneath the limbic system your your
emotional life you're able to look at
that without judgment
and then able to say okay but this is
what I'm trying to do sort of
consciously these are my plans and all
of that and now how do I are you
altering either of them or are you
beginning to say I need to understand if
this is a useful emotional driver or a
destructive emotional driver like what
is that process I think you describe it
very well
um and when you go deeper by the way you
go literally into your subconscious
so you're creating a connection when you
transcend I do Transcendental Meditation
when you transcend I am not conscious
and I'm not unconscious
I am in the subconscious I I'm not aware
uh but if somebody won't make a little
noise like that boom I would I would so
it's not like being asleep and that's
also by the way where creativity comes
from it you know it's like you go take a
hot shower and a great idea comes not
because you're muscling it so when
you're having that then
um you're calm
and your natural state and then these
things Bubble Up and it helps that
alignment so you say uh okay let me look
go above myself
let me let me go above myself and look
at myself within the context of my
circumstances what is around me how does
that work how does reality work
okay if I do this what are the
consequences and so the the going above
it and just saying I'm responsible for
my decisions my life and how do I
navigate the things the things there
that I can pull the levers of to who do
I get how do I do how do I deal with
those and going above it in that calm
way is really what it's about and when
you do it well with others so you
triangulate that's why I have the
radical truthfulness and the radical
transparency when you have that radical
truthfulness and the radical
transparency you're triangulating with
others you're going above it with them
and you're just looking at that
circumstance and you say okay well we're
in the same goal or are we and then how
do I navigate those so that we get to
where we want to go because if you're
forming your company you've got your
company we're on the same Mission
together right so now let's all go above
ourselves what are your strengths and
weaknesses how do we get it what's true
and how do we do that with transparency
and that's it
yeah oh man so so powerful and putting
into action I'm really seeing exactly
how it begins to allow
and I think truth is probably the what
you call hyper realism the getting to
such an objective look at what is true
and going back to sort of an objective
look at that emotional state which I
think is where a lot of people struggle
one of the biggest and most profound
probably the only lightning rod moment
in my life where it's like whoa my life
can be divided into before that literal
like instantaneous recognition and after
everything is completely different and
that was the first time where I realized
that I was being driven by something
that I had not yet recognized which was
I was telling everybody that I wanted to
generate wealth in my life but I was
acting like I just wanted people to tell
me that I was smart and so the the like
friction between those like hit this
collision and so at the time I was just
a copywriter and the guys who would
later become my partners at the time
were my employers and we got this huge
fight over something stupid and I was
arguing an argument arguing for my idea
I needed my idea to win because I had
they were just so much farther ahead
than me they were smarter than me and
that they can process data faster and
and that that's just true like they
could think through things more rapidly
than I could so I was like I have an
inferiority complex over how fast they
think and they're like 15 years ahead of
me as entrepreneurs so I just always
feel like a buffoon and so I'm starting
to really feel badly about myself and so
I'm arguing for this dumb idea arguing
arguing arguing and then finally I wear
them down and they agree and I was like
[__] I know it's the wrong idea like
there's a voice in my head screaming you
know this is a stupid idea stop arguing
for it but I needed to win and so when
they left I thought okay whoa what
what's real I just need to know what's
real no judgment on me if what you want
is to get rich you have to change the
way that you're acting immediately but
if what you really want is to just feel
smart you need to leave this company
because budding heads with them every
day and feeling inferior is is never
going to get you there
and so in that I realized wait there's
actually a third option where I could
value myself entirely for Learning and
if I switched my identity over from
being smart being right being good being
worthy to just I learned that's what I
do
then everything will change and it did
literally like that like I remember that
day so clearly so
to me what you're describing is just
another one of those
right you have to go go deeper on that
concept the notion that everything Loops
that history repeats because I think
people get it from like a U.S history
class but they don't necessarily
understand it in their own life there's
practically nothing
that hasn't happened before really if
you look at the theme so when I take
your your particular case I can digress
into it but I I won't I'll come back to
that in in a second
almost everything that happens has
happened many many times before and just
like I described there's the hero's
journey and there's this and that
there's that particular path and the
whole thing happens over and over again
so my reaction
um to what you're saying is
um yep that's absolutely right that's a
winning strategy so if you step back
from that and you write okay what
happened to you what would what happened
to you is what we're talking about you
went above yourself okay my so you
exemplify it you okay here are the
things you went above yourself now you
could have had the ego thing the Big O
barrier okay the ego barrier is going to
be the thing that's sort of going to
kill you then by reconciling what your
subliminal desires were okay I want to
be the judge this smart and then
connecting that with your intellect and
saying okay now intellect what is really
going on here okay and then to be able
to step out of that now you just did it
alone but you could do it with others in
better and and so you figure out oh okay
this is that here's what the choices are
here's what how reality works and so I'm
just saying you did what we were talking
about right and if everybody if
everybody gets that and really
understands how to go do that the number
the two big things is how do you get
your alignment of your lower level you
with your upper level you how do you get
um past your ego and your blind spot and
we know what the ego barrier is like I
got to be right or whatever it is or I'm
not good at this the blind spot barrier
is the realization that people actually
see things different they see different
things like somebody will see the big
picture somebody will see the detail
they'll focus on different things almost
like a color spectrum type of thing and
if you realize that you will see a part
of that spectrum and other people will
see the other part of the spectrum and
so that you really need to when you go
above yourself you really need to
orchestrate all those ways of seeing be
because you are not just one of those
people that's got to do it yourself your
way of being the the success is to go
above it and be the orchestrator and
know what you're good at and what you're
not good at so it's almost like if you
want your life to be successful you will
not let yourself do certain things
because you're just no good at them once
you get that picture down then you can
find the past wherever the paths are
you're open-minded because you now
you've given up your ego barrier and
your blind spot barrier so your
particular case just was another one of
those
yeah the concept of just another one of
those I think is
um it's bizarrely easy to miss in your
book and so I want to linger on this
point for a second and it's funny
because people ask you this question all
the time and you give the same answer
you're so consistent and yet people
don't spend the time that you spend so
let me encapsulate uh you've done so
well as an investor it's kind of crazy
and so needless to say people like all
right what's the strategy and your
answer is actually usually not specific
your answer is understand the historical
context understand the historical
context and get smart people around you
so you're not making decisions by
yourself so the notion of it's another
one of those is looking at investing
looking at The Human Condition looking
at your own life as this thing that has
these repeating elements every dimension
of every everything the way is another
one of those and so that's how you could
if I can get people to think what I want
to convey what that means and then I
want to then understand how to think at
the principal level
because then life becomes so much easier
because if you have the principle and
what I mean about that is
um like you could look at all the things
that are coming at you and they're just
the things coming at you
if you instead uh think of each thing as
being like a type of species think of
that as an like an animal species or
something okay what one of those is it
and how do I deal with those
and you have your principle for dealing
with those so you have the species
coming in you have a principle that
lines up with the species yes so now
there's no guesswork or refiguring it
out I figure it's like um I don't know
it's a type of snake
that's coming at you but everything is
another one of those so when you start
to think about how do I deal with that
how does reality work and how do I deal
with those so the way it looks to me
I'll speak figuratively to help to
convey the image of what I mean by that
maybe there's something like 50
different personality types I don't know
what the exact number is
and they are all living out the same
scripts hop and maybe they're just 50
different Scripts
and then through those you know maybe
there's a certain X100 things through
time
and it seems all confusing because we're
looking at them bit bit by bit you know
it's like you're in a blizzard a
snowstorm and each of these bits come at
you and so on if you can kind of step
back and just say okay okay what one of
those is it and it's happened before and
it's happened to different people so
let's say for example you have a kid and
you think okay now I'm a kid and you
could just sort of say okay now you're
parenting but whatever it is you can
sort of say hey it's happened before a
million times and in that particular
circumstances so when you realize
everything happens over and over again
pretty much for the same kind of reasons
okay and you understand that and you can
almost look at
um who
who's been through it before who knows
how it works how do I best navigate that
thing what are my principles for that
then it's great the reason I discovered
it accidentally I discovered this
accidentally is because I got in the
habit that I'd suggest you get into and
other people get into and that is
um whenever you're in a situation where
you're making a decision important
decision just pause and write down what
type of decision was it and why did I
make that decision that way that's
writing down your principles it's kind
of your recipe for success and we could
talk about it and then every time I'm in
a situation I'll write down why did I
make that decision and we could look at
those criteria did that make sense to do
that decision that way would you have
different criteria and so on and you do
that over a period of time okay and then
you have your principles and then it so
they're just your reasons for making
your decisions and what matters to you
right when you do that so that's why I'm
encouraging you because you're going
through these and then you have found a
path in life I viewed your story what
you just told me is just another one of
those now you keep doing it it'll become
apparent to you how everything's another
one of those because what will happen is
the next time around you're going to
find I don't know let's say you're
firing somebody use that as an example
you would say okay now I'm firing
somebody again okay now let me just kind
of reflect would I modify that principle
and how would I do that and then okay
now maybe you you're firing somebody
who's been with you for 10 years and you
love and that's not the same as firing
the son of a [__] you you want to get
rid of so then you refine that how how
should I deal with that one and that and
why does it make sense because that
reflection why does it make sense why
does it make sense and really wanting
truthfulness you you know not worry
about being embarrassed making mistakes
we're only on the struggle with all of
you together is a good thing
yeah so the how do you define a species
like how do you begin to codify all this
stuff and go because I I think it's all
too easy to get lost in the well this
isn't another one of those this isn't
just firing somebody that's firing
somebody that I love and so no there's
you know this is so different it's
simple because all you have to do really
is to sort to say if you start to think
everyone's another one and I was when
I'm making a decision I just got to
write down why I made the decision I
don't care how you title it okay just
write down okay uh okay what's what what
are your criteria make it write it down
well you'll see that they're close
cousins you know let's say if you're
saying is it a different one because
it's a close relationship that you've
had for a long time or somebody is new
okay well you'll see those two things
are close together okay but it's another
one of those things and it changes your
way of seeing things okay it changes
your perspective again I want to repeat
because then life becomes easier
because it's not all these bits and
pieces okay it's okay it's another one
of those it gives you an Equanimity and
like a ninja okay it's another one of
these coming up hey okay and how do I
approach that and then you can have a
conversation it's just reality how
should you deal with that reality and if
you do that then you think in a whole
different way okay you just want to get
to the best way to deal with your
realities you've talked about how about
30 percent of the people cannot do
radical Candor be great for you to I
call radical transparency but whatever
okay so radical transparency Define what
that is exactly and then what is it
about that 30 percent like are they they
can't get rid of the ego or what what is
that it's just what you're talking about
this the struggle is between themselves
as you go into a conversation and uh and
you're looking at that
um they find
all of them is saying super hard [__]
really direct nice and clear they're not
good at this yeah while simultaneously
saying I don't know if that's true in
other words if I say
that I don't I don't think you're good
at that I'm being honest but also who
knows whether you're good at that right
so how do we then go from you think
you're good at it I don't think you're
good at it and how do we go through a
process to find out together whether
you're good at it or not how do we go
okay well one of my key questions okay
the best way to do it is you do it in
agreed upon way okay the idea is okay we
say okay John you're not so good at that
I don't think okay and then we go
through the how would we judge can we
ask other people do we go through this
test or that test how do we find out
what's true because if you can find out
what's true your life will be better
like do you want to know what you're not
good at
if you know what you're not good at it's
your life's no problem because it you
don't even have to get good at it you
just have to work with somebody who's
good at what you're not good at right so
there's a path forward when you get out
of your head that you got to do that so
the only basic notion is when we're if
we were to have a relationship is if you
and by the way it's non-hierarchical you
could say hey Ray I don't think you're
very good at that and I'm I'm going to
be the same way I put it in because I
needed it because I I'm worried that I'm
going to be wrong
so then you come to me and you say I
don't think it's very good well how do
we find out in a non-ego constrained
objective way whether I'm good at that
or not do you actually lay out criteria
like oh yeah yeah we will do yeah
absolutely you know how do you come upon
that criteria would you do this as a
one-on-one would you do this in a group
how do you begin to tease that stuff out
um first of all in terms of the group
um I like to make everything transparent
so everybody could watch the same thing
happening with anybody so I thought you
would do this in front of a large group
of people no no I would say taping we do
a lot of that tradical transparency
because that way people see is it fair
is it a good process right so I like to
do that discussion but anybody can do it
with anybody right and so but I would
like to have that conversation if it's
like if if I don't think you are good at
something and I am relevant to your life
or vice versa we got to work it out
we've got to figure that out together do
this with your wife in all relationships
in one way or another you have to find
out how you're going to make decisions
there are going to be agreements and
disagreements and you have to have the
art of thoughtful disagreement now
people find their domains differently
maybe somebody says okay I'll take care
of these things and you take care of
that I don't know some people you know
the traditional household might say okay
I'll take care of making the money out
and the man goes out and he makes money
in the world and then when women says
I'll take care of the kids we're not
there anymore but each role I'm trying
to say in some way you have to find out
how to do the art of thoughtful
disagreement it's and it makes sense and
then also knowing what's good what
you're good at and what you're not good
at it's a good thing to know what you're
good at and what you're not good at
right what do you do though like when
you let's say you and your wife realize
oh we actually have something that we
disagree with how to do with the kids
and that's high stakes if you do
something wrong you could have a
material impact on on their psyche and
the way that they approach the world so
there's sort of elevated stakes and
there's just two of you unless you guys
had a way of appealing to other people
would it come down because you said
don't worry so much about what the
person's saying think about the process
by which they got there yeah so I'm
saying
whenever there's a disagreement between
two people that they can't get along on
that they should pause
and they should go above it
and they should say
um how do we how should we deal with
each other when that happens
in other words what are our protocols
for
um working ourselves through that so
that we can then move beyond that to
make a decision and would a specific
protocol in a marriage be something like
if it has to do with the kids you have
more believability than I do so
therefore if we can't come to an
agreement we'll go with your decision
there are that could be one of the
protocols the main thing I'm trying to
convey
is when people are ordinarily in an
argument
they just argue and they and and they
don't know the ground rules they don't
have a process in place so if you look
above it and you come up with whatever
your rules are it may be you could have
domain it may be that you have a
mutually agreed party that you would say
okay let's plead our cases too and have
them mediate it it could be a lot of
different paths could exist to say ah I
think that's a good path when we have a
disagreement on how we plead our cases
and then move Beyond it but you need to
have the path and that's what I mean by
principled level thinking go above it
how should it be instead of you know
this type of thing right we all need
that in order to have successful
relationships it's fundamental right
when you got this and you're not going
above it and saying why do you have this
or how should this occur then you've got
trouble
the key is
you want to connect with them you want
them to fall in love with you you want
them to be inspired you want them to
feel better about themselves when
they're around you than when they're not
and if you can pull that off they will
go to war for you